📖 [Docs] Single ClusterExtension ownership concept (#1258)
operator-framework/operator-controller: docs/drafts/single-owner-objects.md

# OLM Ownership Enforcement for `ClusterExtensions`

> In OLM, **a given object can only be owned by a single `ClusterExtension` at a time**. This ensures that resources within a Kubernetes cluster are managed consistently and prevents conflicts between multiple `ClusterExtensions` attempting to control the same object.

Author: thanks, incorporating the suggestions

> In OLM, **a given object can only be owned by a single `ClusterExtension` at a time**. This ensures that resources within a Kubernetes cluster are managed consistently and prevents conflicts between multiple `ClusterExtensions` attempting to control the same object.

Author: changing this everywhere, kept a single first ref to "objects" in parentheses to clarify, since some people use that term too.

## Key Concept: Single Ownership

The core principle enforced by OLM is that each resource (object) can only have one `ClusterExtension` as its owner. This prevents overlapping or conflicting management by multiple `ClusterExtensions`, ensuring that each resource is uniquely associated with only one operator bundle.

## Implications of Single Ownership

### 1. Operator Bundles That Provide a CRD Can Only Be Installed Once

> If an operator bundle provides a `CustomResourceDefinition` (CRD), it can only be installed once in the cluster. Attempting to install another `ClusterExtension` that provides the same CRD will result in a failure, as OLM prevents multiple ownership of the CRD resource.

Reviewer: The language is little confusing. In the first sentence we talk about operator bundle and the next sentence it is cluster extension. The relationship between an operator and cluster extension might not be clear to all of our users and can lead to confusion. I would suggest following text
```
Operator bundles provides CustomResourceDefinitions(CRDs) which are part of a cluster extension. So a bundle can be installed once in a cluster. Attempting to install another bundle with same CRDs will result in to failure. As each custom resource can have one ClusterExtension as its Owner.
```

Author: great suggestion. made the change.

Author: I adapted this suggestion into the paragraph

### 2. `ClusterExtensions` Cannot Share Objects

> OLM's single-owner policy means that **`ClusterExtensions` cannot share ownership of any objects**. If one `ClusterExtension` manages a specific resource (e.g., a custom resource or a service), another `ClusterExtension` cannot claim ownership of the same object. Any attempt to do so will be blocked by the system.

Reviewer 2: wdyt?

```suggestion
OLM's single-owner policy means that **`ClusterExtensions` cannot share ownership of any objects**. If one `ClusterExtension` manages a specific resource (e.g., a `Deployment`, `CustomResourceDefinition`, or `Service`), another `ClusterExtension` cannot claim ownership of the same object. Any attempt to do so will be blocked by the system.
```

## Error Messages

When a conflict occurs due to multiple `ClusterExtensions` attempting to manage the same resource, `operator-controller` will return a clear error message, indicating the ownership conflict.

- **Example Error**:
  ```plaintext

>   CustomResourceDefinition 'logfilemetricexporters.logging.openshift.io' already exists in namespace 'openshift-logging' and cannot be managed by operator-controller

Reviewer 2: Hehehe - nice plug for OpenShift XD 

Should we have the work OpenShift in the upstream? Not necessarily against it...just a thought?

Author: ha, yeah replaced the ref. good catch

# OLM Ownership Enforcement for `ClusterExtensions`

> In OLM, **a custom resource (or object) can only be owned by a single `ClusterExtension` at a time**. This ensures that resources within a Kubernetes cluster are managed consistently and prevents conflicts between multiple `ClusterExtensions` attempting to control the same resource.

Reviewer 3: It won't always be a custom resource, and I imagine is actually more likely to be a native Kubernetes resource, maybe something like this is more accurate?:

```suggestion
In OLM, **a Kubernetes resource can only be owned by a single `ClusterExtension` at a time**. This ensures that resources within a Kubernetes cluster are managed consistently and prevents conflicts between multiple `ClusterExtensions` attempting to control the same resource.
```

## Key Concept: Single Ownership

The core principle enforced by OLM is that each resource (object) can only have one `ClusterExtension` as its owner. This prevents overlapping or conflicting management by multiple `ClusterExtensions`, ensuring that each resource is uniquely associated with only one operator bundle.

## Implications of Single Ownership

### 1. Operator Bundles That Provide a CRD Can Only Be Installed Once

Operator bundles provide `CustomResourceDefinitions` (CRDs), which are part of a `ClusterExtension`. This means a bundle can only be installed once in a cluster. Attempting to install another bundle that provides the same CRDs will result in a failure, as each custom resource can have only one `ClusterExtension` as its owner.

### 2. `ClusterExtensions` Cannot Share Objects

> OLM's single-owner policy means that **`ClusterExtensions` cannot share ownership of any objects**. If one `ClusterExtension` manages a specific resource (e.g., a `Deployment`, `CustomResourceDefinition`, or `Service`), another `ClusterExtension` cannot claim ownership of the same object. Any attempt to do so will be blocked by the system.

Reviewer: s/obejcts/custom resource/ . We should replace all mention of objects with custom resource.

Author: done

## Error Messages

When a conflict occurs due to multiple `ClusterExtensions` attempting to manage the same resource, `operator-controller` will return a clear error message, indicating the ownership conflict.

- **Example Error**:
  ```plaintext
  CustomResourceDefinition 'logfilemetricexporters.logging.kubernetes.io' already exists in namespace 'kubernetes-logging' and cannot be managed by operator-controller
  ```

This error message signals that the resource is already being managed by another `ClusterExtension` and cannot be reassigned or "shared."

## What This Means for You

- **Uniqueness of Operator Bundles**: Ensure that operator bundles providing the same CRDs are not installed more than once. This can prevent potential installation failures due to ownership conflicts.

> - **Avoid Resource Sharing**: If you need different `ClusterExtensions` to interact with similar resources, ensure they are managing separate objects. `ClusterExtensions` cannot jointly manage the same resource due to the single-owner enforcement.

Author: done
